Brief Guide to the Stages of Visualization for the Ngöndro Practice

by Patrul Rinpoche

Namo Samantabhadrāya!

When Tibet was shrouded in the darkness of the five degenerations,[1]With the chariot of your
great and immeasurable bodhicitta,[2]You brought the sunlight of the teachings of secret
mantra-Orgyen, King of Dharma, I keep you forever in my mind!

The enlightened vision of the vajra vehicle of Ancient Translations,All condensed into its quintessence,
like a drop of ḍākinīs’ life-blood;A treasure arising as the spontaneous expression
of reality itself—O Guru, Lord of Dharma, you who brought us these teachings, protect
me!

In a single vessel, you gathered the vital elixir of the great and secret teachingsFrom the
vast, profound realization of the Vidyādhara Guru[3] upholding the six [lineages],[4]And with
this, you satisfied your fortunate disciples, bringing them to maturity and liberation—O
kind and gracious master, I rely on you until I reach enlightenment!

Having begun with this verse of homage, I shall now set down, in one place, the steps of visualization
for the ordinary outer and inner instructions of Longchen Nyingtik.

Taking Refuge

When taking refuge, consider that the place where you are seated is made from various precious
substances: a buddha realm, beautiful and pleasing to the mind, without any undulations,
and smooth like the surface of a mirror.[5] At its centre, in front of you, is a wish-fulfilling
tree with five main branches, its leaves, flowers and fruit filling the whole of
space in every direction.

Slightly above the central branch, seated upon a jewelled throne supported by eight great lions,
and upon seats of lotus, sun and moon, is the incomparable treasury of compassion who
embodies all the buddhas of past, present and future: one’s own glorious root lama. He appears
in the form of Orgyen Dorje Chang (the Great Vajradhara of Oḍḍiyāna), his complexion
white with a tinge of red.[6] He has one face and two hands, and is seated in the posture
of royal ease. With his right hand, he holds a golden five-pronged vajra in the threatening
gesture. In his left hand, which rests in the gesture of equanimity, is a skull-cup brimming
with nectar and containing the vase of immortality that is also full of deathless wisdom
nectar, and ornamented on top by a wish-fulfilling tree. He is united in an inseparable
embrace with the consort Yeshe Tsogyal, who is white and holding a knife and a skull-cup.
On his body, he wears a silk cloak, monastic robes and gown. On his head, he wears a lotus
hat.

On the branch before him is the Buddha Śākyamuni, surrounded by the thousand buddhas of this
Fortunate Aeon. Their bodies are white, yellow, red, green and blue in colour, and they are
all in the supreme nirmāṇakāya form, wearing monastic robes. They are adorned with the
thirty-two major and eighty minor marks, such as the crown protuberance, wheels on their feet,
and so on. All of them are seated in the cross-legged “vajra posture”.

On the branch to the right[7] are the bodhisattvas, the Eight Great Close Sons[8] surrounded
by the sangha of noble bodhisattvas. As a sign of their tireless and constant efforts to
benefit beings, they are all standing in the posture of equanimity. They are adorned with
the thirteen ornaments of the perfect sambhogakāya.

On the branch to the left are the two supreme śrāvakas,[9] surrounded by the noble community
of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas wearing monastic robes.

On the rear branch, encased within a lattice of rainbow light, is the Jewel ofthe Dharma in
the form of piles of books, the vowels and consonants makingtheir own sound. At the top are
the six million four hundred thousand tantrasof Dzogpachenpo.

Above Guru Rinpoche’s head are all the masters of the Dzogchen lineage, from the dharmakāya
Samantabhadra down to your own kind root lama. They are seated one above the other, the throne
of an earlier master slightly above the head of the next.

Surrounding Guru Rinpoche are the root and lineage masters above, the assembly of yidam deities
in the central section, and the mamos and ḍākinīs below. In between are all the Dharma
protectors of both wisdom and action. Consider that the males all face outwards, acting to
avert any obstacles or hindrances to the Dharma or the attainment of enlightenment, and
to prevent any obstacles entering from the outside. Whereas the female Dharma protectors all
face inwards, acting to ward off any obstacles or hindrances to the Dharma or the attainment
of enlightenment, and to prevent any accomplishments from escaping.

Seated to your right and left are your father and mother from this presentlife. In front are
all the sentient beings of the six realms and three worlds,led by your bitterest enemies
and those obstructing forces that do you harm.Together they form an enormous gathering that
covers the entire surface of the earth.

As a physical demonstration of your respect, you all perform prostrations. Toshow your respect
vocally, you recite the verse for taking refuge. And with amind that is respectful, you
form the following resolve, cultivating a feelingof ardent longing and complete and heartfelt
trust:

Whether my situation is high or low, in happiness or sorrow, in circumstancesgood or bad, from
this day on, I shall neither ask my father nor seek mymother’s advice. Nor shall I decide
by myself. Instead, I shall rely on you,the true objects of refuge, the Three Jewels. To
you, I shall make offerings.You will be the only objects of my practice.

Recite the refuge verse, “KÖN CHOK SUM NGÖ… (In the Three Jewels, and their essence…)” and then,
at the end of the session consider that, as a result of your devotion to the refuge assembly,
countless rays of light—white, yellow,red, green and blue—stream out from the various
deities. As they touch you and all sentient beings, your karma, disturbing emotions,
habitual tendencies,negativity and obscurations accumulated throughout beginningless time
arepurified completely, just as when light from the rising sun shines into a caveit dispels
the darkness within. In an instant, you and all the other beingsfly up with a whirring sound,
like a flock of birds scattered by a sling-stone, and dissolve into the assembly of
refuge deities.

Then the refuge gradually melts into light. In front, the buddhas all dissolveinto Śākyamuni.
To the right, the bodhisattvas all dissolve intoAvalokiteśvara. To the left, the noble sangha
of śrāvakas andpratyekabuddhas dissolves into Śāriputra. They all dissolve into the
Dharmaat the back, and then this entire Jewel of the Dharma dissolves into GuruRinpoche. All
the surrounding masters, yidams, Dharma protectors and guardians also dissolve into Guru
Rinpoche. The lama too then slowly dissolves, and vanishes into light. Rest for a short
while in a state that is free from conceptual reference.Then, as you rise from this meditation,
recognize all that appears and existsas the form of the refuge deities and dedicate
the merit.

Generating Bodhicitta

When generating bodhicitta, the dissolution of the refuge deities follows thesame sequence as
above, but here Guru Rinpoche dissolves into you, and you consider that the absolute bodhicitta
present within the minds of the objects of refuge arises clearly in your own mind.

Vajrasattva Purification

All the special experiences and realizations of the profound path areprevented from arising
by your harmful actions, obscurations and habitualtendencies. There is no method for purifying
them more profound than themeditation and recitation of the Lama Vajrasattva. The way
to practise it isas follows.

Consider that you remain in your ordinary form. At an arrow’s length aboveyour head, upon a
lotus and a moon disc seat, is a brilliant white syllableHUNG which becomes, in essence, your
glorious root master, the incomparable treasury of compassion who embodies all the buddhas
of past, present and future. He is in the form of the sambhogakāya Buddha Vajrasattva,
white in colour, and as bright as a snowy peak lit up by a hundred thousand suns. He has
one face and two arms. With his right hand, he holds a five-pronged vajra of awareness and
emptiness in front of his heart. With his left, he rests the bell of appearance and emptiness
upon his left hip. His two legs are crossed in the vajra posture, and he embraces, in
an inseparable union, his consort white Vajragarvā (Dorje Nyemma).[10] Their bodies are
not like those of ordinary beings, but are pure and composed of light.

At Vajrasattva’s heart is a full moon disc, and upon it is a white syllableHUNG, as fine as
if it were drawn with a single hair. The HUNG is encircled ina clockwise direction by a string
of letters forming the hundred syllablemantra. They are like the horns of cattle (meaning
that they are closetogether and yet they do not touch). As you recite the hundred syllablemantra,
ensuring that the four powers are complete, imagine that the whitebodhicitta
nectar drips down from each syllable of the mantra garland.

Flowing through the body of Vajrasattva, the nectar emerges from the point of union with the
consort, and then, passing through the “aperture of Brahma” at the crown of your head, it
cleans the entire interior of your body. Everything impure pours out of your body from the
two lower orifices, the soles of your feet and all the pores of your skin. All your physical
illnesses are flushed out in the form of rotten blood and pus; all negative forces are
expelled in the form of fish, snakes, frogs, tadpoles, spiders, scorpions and ants; and
all your negativity is expelled as smoke, black liquid, clouds and vapours.

The golden earth beneath you opens up to reveal King Yāma, the Lord of Death, surrounded by
all the male and female beings to whom you owe karmic debts, and those who seek your life
in vengeance. As you recite the hundred syllable mantra, the impurities pour down into their
open mouths and into the hands and arms they raise expectantly towards you.

At the end, imagine that Death and all the others beneath the earth every kind of karmic creditor
and all those who seek your life in vengeance arecompletely satisfied. Past scores have
been settled; debts have been repaid;the desire for vengeance has been pacified; and you
are cleansed of all yourpast negative actions and obscurations. Yama closes his mouth and
fists, andlowers his arms. The earth closes over once again.

Imagine that your body now becomes transparent inside and out, like animmaculate crystal vase.
At the crown of your head is the chakra of greatbliss with its thirty-two radial channels
curving downwards. In your throat isthe chakra of enjoyment with its sixteen radial channels
curving upwards. Atthe level of your heart is the Dharma chakra with its eight radial
channelscurving downwards. At the level of your navel is the chakra of manifestationwith
its sixty-four radial channels curving upwards.

As the shining, white bodhicitta fills these four chakras, you receive thefour empowerments
(vase, secret, wisdom and precious word); you are purified of the four obscurations (karmic,
emotional, cognitive and those of habitual tendencies); and you accomplish the four kāyas
(nirmāṇakāya, sambhogakāya, dharmakāya and svābhāvikakāya).

Lama Vajrasattva is pleased and, smiling at you, he says:

Son/daughter of an enlightened family, your negative actions, obscurations,impairments and breakages
of samaya are all purified.

Granting his approval in this way he melts into light, just like butter thatis placed on a hot
stone, and then dissolves into you.

Now you yourself appear in the form of Vajrasattva, exactly as you visualizedhim before. In
your heart is a moon disc, the size of a flattened mustardseed. At its centre is a blue HŪṂ.
In front of the HŪṂ is a white syllableOṂ; to its right is the word VAJRA in yellow; behind
it is a red SA; and toits left is a green TVA.

As you recite the mantra (OṂ VAJRA SATTVA HŪṂ), immeasurable rays of coloured light emanate
from the syllables and make offerings that delight all the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the
ten directions. The blessings of their body, speech and mind come streaming back in the form
of light and rays of light that dissolve into you, so that you obtain all the supreme
and ordinaryaccomplishments. This establishes the interdependent conditions for benefiting
yourself through realizing the dharmakāya.

Then consider that the rays of light touch all the sentient beings dwellingthroughout the six
realms of the three worlds, purifying their karma,disturbing emotions, habitual patterns,
negativity and obscurations.

The entire outer world becomes the buddhafield of Abhirati ('Manifest Joy'),and all the beings
within it are transformed into white, yellow, red, greenand blue Vajrasattvas, all of whom
recite the mantra OṂ VAJRA SATTVA HŪṂ, creating an immense humming sound. This establishes
the interdependentconditions for benefiting others through attaining the rūpakāya. As
it issaid:

Actualizing the benefit of self and others through the emanation and re-convergence [of light],
cognitive obscurations are purified.

At the end of the session, visualize that the whole universe—the pure realm ofManifest Joy—dissolves
into the beings within it, the Vajrasattvas. Then, allof these Vajrasattvas dissolve
into you, the principal Vajrasattva. Gradually,you too melt into light from the outside
inwards, dissolving into the OṂ atyour heart. The OṂ then dissolves into the VAJRA, the
VAJRA into the SA, theSA into the TVA, the TVA into the shabkyu of the HŪṂ, the shabkyu into
theA-chung, and the A-chung into the body of the HA. The body then dissolves into the head,
the head into the crescent, the crescent into the bindu, and thebindu into the nāda.
Finally, the nāda too dissolves, and you remain for ashort while in a state that is without
conceptual reference.

When you arise from that state, recognize the whole outer universe and thebeings contained within
it as the environment and inhabitants of the purerealm of Manifest Joy, and dedicate
the merit.

Gathering the Accumulations

1. Maṇḍala Offering

Begin by arranging the five piles of the accomplishment maṇḍala. In the centre is a pile representing
Buddha Vairocana, surrounded by the deities of the buddha family. In the East is
a pile for the Buddha Vajrasattva[11] and the deities of the vajra family. In the South is
a pile for Buddha Ratnasambhava and the deities of the ratna family. In the West is a pile
for Buddha Amitābha and the deities of the padma family. And in the North is a pile for
Buddha Amoghasiddhi and the deities of the karma family.

Alternatively, as in the Refuge practice, you may consider that the centralpile represents your
own root master in the form of Guru Rinpoche, with allthe masters of the Dzogchen lineage
above him. In this case, the pile in frontis for Buddha Śākyamuni and the thousand perfect
buddhas of this FortunateAeon. The pile on the right is for the Eight Great Bodhisattvas,
surrounded bythe noble bodhisattva sangha. The pile on the left is for Śāriputra andMaudgalyāyana
and the noble sangha of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. The pile at the back represents
the Jewel of the Dharma in the form of piles of books.

For the offering maṇḍala, recite “OṂ VAJRA BHUMI ĀḤ HŪṂ…etc.” (from theThirty-Seven Point maṇḍala
Offering) and arrange the outer realm in stages.One arrangement of piles symbolizing
the four continents with Mount Meru in the centre constitutes one world. A thousand of these
make a “first-orderuniverse of one thousand worlds”. Multiplying this a thousand times
produces a “second-order universe of one thousand times one thousand worlds”. Then,multiplying
this by a further thousand, we arrive at what is called, “a third-order great universal
system of one thousand million worlds”, or a “cosmos ofa billion universes”.

Imagine throughout all these worlds the most exquisite enjoyments of gods and human beings,
and offer them all to your master and the deities of thenirmāṇakāya. This is the offering
of the ordinary maṇḍala of the nirmāṇakāya.

Next, imagine Akaniṣṭha Ghanavyūha complete with all the inconceivablefeatures of a spontaneously
manifest sambhogakāya realm, as well as countless offering goddesses, such as the goddess
of beauty and so on, and offer them all to your master and the deities of the sambhogakāya.
This is theextraordinary maṇḍala of the sambhogakāya.

Then, upon the base of the maṇḍala, which represents the unconditioneddharmadhātu, place small
piles representing your attachment to appearance and whatever thoughts you may have. Offer
this to your master and the deities of the dharmakāya. This is the special maṇḍala of
the dharmakāya.

2. Accumulation of the Kusali: Chöd

You are in your ordinary form. In the sky before you is a precious thronesupported by a lion,
elephant, peacock, shang-shang bird[12] and horse.Seated there, upon a lotus, sun and moon,
and piles of silken cushions, isyour own root master. Surrounding him, upon an inconceivable
variety of seats, including lotuses, sun-discs and corpses, are the masters of the
lineageabove, the yidam deities in the space in between, and the mamos and ḍākinīsbelow. Around
them all are the hosts of Dharma protectors and guardians.

Seated below are all the beings of the six realms and three worlds.

If you are familiar with the visualization stage (kyérim), you can recite“PHAṬ!” and simultaneously
eject your consciousness along the central channel and out through the “aperture of
Brahma” at the crown of your head, where it is immediately transformed into Tröma, the Wrathful
Mother.

If you are not yet accustomed to this kind of visualization practice, begin bymeditating on
your consciousness as Tröma, and, then, as you utter thesyllable “PHAṬ!” consider that she
shoots out through the crown of your head.

In either case, Tröma—the essence of your consciousness—is black, and has one face and two hands.
With her right hand, she is waving through the air acurved knife for cutting the three
poisons at their root. It is this that shenow uses to slice your skull, along the level
of the eyebrows, from your body,which has grown huge, fat and greasy, and is as large as
the entire billion-fold world-system. Tröma uses the skull to make a skull-cup equal in size
tothe entire cosmos of a billion worlds. With her left hand, she picks up theskull-cup
and places it, with the brow facing her, upon a hearth made of threehuman skulls, each as
large as Mount Meru. Then, with the hooked knife in her right hand, she lifts the whole corpse
and places it inside the skull-cup.

Now visualize in the space beneath the skull the vertical stroke of a letterA, red, with the
nature of fire, and hot to the touch. Above the skull, thereappears a white syllable HAṂ
with the nature of nectar. As fire blazes up fromthe A-stroke, it heats the skull-cup until
the corpse melts into bubblingnectar, and anything foul or impure is expelled in the form
of a frothingscum.

The HAṂ begins to melt in the heat of the fire, and from it drops of nectarbegin to fall. Rays
of light shine out from the HAṂ to the buddhas andbodhisattvas, so that their compassion
and blessings dissolve into the nectarin the skull-cup in the form of wisdom nectar and
blue light-rays. Finally,the syllable HAṂ also dissolves into light, and melts into the nectar
in theskull-cup.

The Variegated Feast

Steam rises from the boiling white and red wisdom nectar. It takes the form ofinconceivable
offering materials, such as the eight auspicious symbols andseven attributes of royalty—parasols,
victory-banners, canopies, golden wheels with a thousand spokes, white conch shells
spiralling to the right, and so on—which are offered to the guests above. It is transformed
into whateversubstances the yidams, ḍākas, ḍākinīs, Dharma protectors and guardians findpleasing,
and they are delighted by the offerings.

Below them, all the beings of the six realms of existence receive whateverthey wish for, whatever
it is they desire. Those who want food receive food.Those who wish for clothing receive
clothing. Those desiring a home receive a home. Consider that all their wishes are fulfilled
and that they aresatisfied.

The White Feast

Then above them the inconceivable gathering of root and lineage masters,buddhas and bodhisattvas
absorb the nectar through their tongues, which have the form of hollow vajra tubes. Consider
that they are pleased and satisfied, and that you complete the accumulations, purify
your obscurations, and receive all the supreme and ordinary accomplishments.

The assembly of yidam deities consume the nectar, absorbing it through hollow tongues shaped
like vajras, wheels, jewels, lotuses, or crossed vajras. As a result, you complete the accumulations,
purify your obscurations, and receive all the supreme and ordinary siddhis.

In the space in front of the skull-cup, the wisdom and activity Dharmaprotectors now take their
share of the nectar through the hollow sunbeams oftheir tongues, with the result that
obstacles and circumstances unfavourableto your Dharma practice and enlightenment are dispelled.

Next, if you are experienced in visualization, consider that you emanateinconceivable throngs
of activity performing ḍākinīs, as numerous as sentientbeings, each of them holding a wisdom
skull-cup filled with wisdom nectar that they offer to every single being.

Alternatively, you could imagine that you yourself, as Tröma, use the skull-cup in your hand
to scatter nectar, satisfying all the beings of the sixrealms and purifying their karmic
vision, sufferings and habitual tendencies.

Think especially of those beings, male and female, to whom you owe karmicdebts incurred in your
past lives throughout beginningless time.

There are debts that shorten our lives because we have killed; debts thatplague us with illness
because we have attacked and beaten others; debts that make us poor because we have stolen.
There are debts for protection given by superiors, for services rendered by inferiors,
and for help and support from equals; and there are debts to overlords and underlings.

When each of these male and female creditors has had their fill, you are freedfrom your karmic
obligations, your debts are repaid, you are delivered fromtheir deadly vengeance and purified
of all your harmful deeds andobscurations.

All male beings attain the level of noble Avalokiteśvara, and all the femalesattain the level
of Jetsün Tārā.

Recite “PHAṬ!” and then rest in a state free from any concept of an offering,one who offers,
or a recipient to whom offerings are made.

Guru Yoga

Then there is the instruction on Guru Yoga, which is a practice for arousingthe wisdom of realization
in the mind. The purification of buddha fieldsrequires great strength of concentration,
so consider that yoursurroundings—for as far as your perception extends—are the realm
of LotusLight, perfect in all its features.

You are at its centre. To ensure that you are a suitable vessel for theempowerments, to create
the right interdependent conditions for following the master, and as a support for arousing
Guru Rinpoche’s wisdom of bliss and emptiness, consider that you are, in essence, the
ḍākinī Yeshe Tsogyal. Inform, however, you appear as Vajrayoginī: red in colour, with one
face, twohands and three eyes that gaze longingly at the heart of the master.

With your right hand you play a skull-drum, held aloft, to awaken beings fromthe sleep of ignorance
and confusion. Your left hand holds a hooked knife forcutting the three poisons at
their root. You are naked except for your boneornaments and garlands of flowers. And you
are visible yet insubstantial, likea reflection in a mirror.

In the sky, an arrow’s length above your head, visualize a lotus with ahundred thousand petals,
upon which there is a sun-disc, and then a moon disc. Seated upon this sun and moon disc
seat is your glorious root master, the incomparable treasury of compassion who is the embodiment
of all the buddhas of the past, present and future. He appears in the form of the
GreatVajradhara of Oḍḍiyāna (Orgyen Dorje Chang) with one face and two hands.

With his right hand he holds a five-pronged golden vajra at his heart. In hisleft hand he holds
a skull-cup brimming with nectar, containing the vase oflongevity that is also filled
with the nectar of deathless wisdom andornamented on top by a wish-fulfilling tree. Cradled
in his left arm he holdsthe three-pointed khaṭvāṅga (trident) symbolizing the Princess consort(Mandāravā).
Its three points represent the essence, nature and compassionate energy
(ngowo, rangshyin and tukjé). Below these three prongs are three severed heads, dry, fresh
and rotten, symbolizing the three kāyas. Nine iron rings adorning the prongs represent the
nine yānas. The khaṭvāṅga is also adorned with locks of hair from dead and living mamos
and ḍākinīs, as a sign that the Master subjugated them all when he practised austerities
in the Eight Great Charnel Grounds.

On his head he wears a lotus hat and on his body he wears a silk cloak, Dharma robes and gown.
His two feet are in the royal posture.

All around him, within a lattice of five-coloured light, appear the eightvidyādharas of India,
the twenty-five disciples of Tibet, the deities of thethree roots, and an ocean of oath-bound
protectors. Your visualization shouldbe so vivid that your ordinary perception simply
ceases automatically.

As you recite the Seven Line Prayer from, “Hum! In the north-west of the landof Oḍḍiyāna” to,
“GURU PADMA SIDDHI HŪṂ”, invoke the environment andinhabitants of the Glorious Copper Coloured
Mountain, and consider that they dissolve into the assembly of deities you have visualized.

Then, multiply your body as many times as there are atoms in the universe, and perform prostrations.
Make inconceivably vast offerings of both actualpossessions and those created by
the mind. Confess all your harmful deeds and obscurations, accumulated throughout beginningless
time. Consider that they are purified by rays of light which emanate from the hearts
of the deities in the field of merit, touching a black pile on your tongue, within which
aregathered all the harmful actions, obscurations and habitual tendencies of your body, speech
and mind. Rejoice at all the positive actions that have ever been accumulated, absolute
and relative. Implore the buddhas to turn the Dharma-wheel of the three yānas. Request
them to remain until samsara is completely empty and not to pass into nirvāṇa. Dedicate all
the positive actions accumulated in the past, the present and the future as the cause for
all beings attaining enlightenment.

When the time comes to practise “Invoking the Siddhi” say the prayer, “O Guru Rinpoche, Precious
One…” (JESTÜN GURU RINPOCHE) once after every hundred recitations of the Vajra Guru mantra.
Then, when it is time for “Invoking the Blessing” say, after each hundred recitations,
the prayer beginning: “I have no one else to turn to…” (DAK LA RÉ SA…) and ending: “Purify
our emotional and cognitive obscurations, O powerful one!” (…DRIP NYI CHONG SHIK NÜ TU
CHEN).

When it is time to receive the accomplishments, recite “In the Guru’sforehead…”(GURUI MIN TSAM…)
and receive the four empowerments. Then, as a result of your devotion and longing, the
master assumes a compassionate expression and smiles at you, his eyes filled with love.

From his heart, a ray of warm, red light shoots out and as it touches you,Vajrayoginī, you melt
into a sphere of red light the size of a pea, whichshoots up towards the Guru like a crackling
spark and dissolves into hisheart. Then the Guru also dissolves, and you rest in
the unborn state of thedharmakāya: utter simplicity without concept or reference. Then dedicate
themerit.

Virtue!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey and edited by Janine Schulz. There are many similarities between
this text and sections of Patrul Rinpoche’s most famous work, kun bzang bla ma’i zhal lung,
and we have been greatly influenced by the style and choice of terminology of The Words
of My Perfect Teacher, the Padmakara Translation Group's masterful English translation.