Concise Preliminaries
by Shabkar Tsokdruk Rangdrol

Namo guru!
daljor nyé ka ciwa nyur du ong
The freedoms and advantages are hard to find, and death comes quickly;
lé dré khorwé nyemik sampar ja
Actions have their effects, and saṃsāra its trials—on these, I shall reflect.
Visualisation of the Field of Merit
khorwa ngen song dukngal lé kyobpé
Those who protect us from the sufferings of saṃsāra and the lower realms—
kyab yul lha tsok namkha gangwar shyukpar ja
The deities who are the objects of refuge fill the whole of space.
Taking Refuge
lama könchok sum la kyab su chi
In the guru and the Three Jewels, I take refuge.
Arousing Bodhicitta
jam dang nyingjé chang chub sem kye do
I generate love, compassion and the mind of bodhicitta!
Recite these lines as many times as you can, and then:
kyab yul lha tsok ö shyu rang la tim
The sources of refuge melt into light and dissolve into me.
rang lü dang sal ö kyi pungpor gyur
And my own body becomes a mass of glowing radiant light.
Visualisation and Recitation of Vajrasattva
chiwor dor sem ku lé düdtsi bab
Vajrasattva appears at my crown, and from his body there flows a stream of nectar
rang gi né dön dik drip dakpar gyur
To purify my illnesses, harmful influences, negative actions and obscurations.
Recite the hundred-syllable mantra Oṃ vajrasattva... etc.
dor sem ö du shyu né rang la tim
Vajrasattva melts into light and dissolves into me.
rang lü dang sal ö kyi pungpor gyur
And my own body becomes a mass of glowing radiant light.
Field of Merit for the Maṇḍala Offering
chinlap ngödrup char tar bep dzepé
Those who cause blessings and accomplishments to fall like rain,
tsok shying lha tsok namkha gangwar shyuk
The deities of the field of merit, fill the whole of space.
Maṇḍala Offering
ngöjor yikyi trulpé mandal bul
This maṇḍala of actual riches and those created by the mind, I offer!
shyé né chinlap ngödrup tsal du sol
Accept it, and grant your blessings and accomplishments, I pray!
tsok shying lha tsok ö shyu rang la tim
The deities of the field of merit melt into light and dissolve into me.
rang lü dang sal ö kyi pungpor gyur
And my own body becomes a mass of glowing radiant light.
Guru Yoga
chiwor seng tri pé dé den teng du
At the crown of my head, on a lion throne, a lotus and a moon-disc seat,
lama dorje chang wang shyukpar gyur
Presides the guru in the form of mighty Vajradhara.
kyab né kundü tsawé lama la
Root teacher, the embodiment of all sources of refuge,
solwa depso dak gyü chin gyi lop
I pray to you: inspire me with your blessings!
Recite this as many times as possible.
lamé ting nge dzin gyi wang shyi kur
The guru, through samādhi, grants the four empowerments,
ö du shyu né rang la timpar gyur
Melts into light and dissolves into me.
lamé tuk dang rang sem yermé dré
The guru's wisdom mind and my own mind merge as one.
sem nyi tong sal chö kü ngang la shyak
And I rest in an experience of dharmakāya, the emptiness and clarity of the nature of mind.
Dedication and Aspiration
di tsön gewé chöku ngön du ché
Through virtuous actions such as this, may I realise the dharmakāya,
zuk ku nyi kyi dro dön chepar shok
And, through the two kāyas with form, act for the welfare of beings.

This concise preliminary practice was composed by the yogi Shabkar. May virtue abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2016. With thanks to Sean Price for providing the Tibetan text.