The Excellent Path to Enlightenment
A Brief Practice of the Preliminaries
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

The Four Thoughts
lama khyen
Guru, care for me!
three times
lama könchok sumpo khyé khyen no
Guru and Three Jewels—Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha—care for me, guide me, inspire me, make me one
with you!
daljor nyé ka tobpa daré tsam
Now I have this unique opportunity, a free and well-favoured human form, so difficult to find.
mitak chiwa nam ong cha machi
But it will not last forever; death can come at any moment,
khorwa gangdu kyé kyang dukngal gyu
And wherever I am born in saṃsāra, it is a cause for suffering;
gedik lé kyi gyundré luwamé
Whether my actions are virtuous or harmful, karma’s cause and effect cannot be escaped.
tarlam tobpa lamé tukjé zung
O guru, hold me with your compassion, so that I find the path to liberation!
Refuge and Bodhicitta
namo dak sok dro kün changchub bar
Namo! Until we attain enlightenment, I and all beings
tsawa sum la kyab su chi
Take refuge in the three roots—guru, deva and ḍākinī.
shyendön sangye tobjé chir
So that I may attain buddhahood for the benefit of others,
mönjuk döndam changsem kyé
I arouse bodhicitta, as aspiration, as action and in its absolute meaning.
Vajrasattva
ah daknyi chiwor pé dé teng
Āḥ! On the crown of my head upon a lotus and moon disc,
lama dorsem yabyum gyi
Is the Guru Vajrasattva in union with his consort.
tukké ngak lé dütsi gyün
From the mantra in his heart flows a stream of nectar,
babpé né dön dikdrib jang
Which purifies all sickness, harmful influences, negative deeds and obscurations.
Recite the hundred syllable mantra.
dorsem ö shyu rang la tim
Vajrasattva melts into light and dissolves into me.
Maṇḍala Offering
om ah hung ku sum shyingkham longchö dang
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! All the pure realms of the three kāyas, all our possessions,
chi nang sangwé chöpé trin
And clouds of offerings, outer, inner and secret,
könchok tsawa sum la bul
I offer to the Three Jewels and the three roots,
shyé né choktün ngödrub tsol
Please accept them, and grant us supreme and ordinary siddhis!
om ah hung guru deva dakini sapariwara ratna mandala pudza megha ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ guru deva ḍākinī saparivāra ratna maṇḍala pūja megha āḥ hūṃ
Guru Yoga
rang dün namkhar ja ö long
In the sky before me, amidst an expanse of rainbow coloured light,
tsawé lama tötreng tsal
Is my own root guru in the form of Padma Tötreng Tsal,
gyü sum rigdzin gyatsö kor
Surrounded by a vast gathering of vidyādharas of the three transmissions,
kyab kündüpé ngowor shyuk
And embodying every source of refuge.
Put your energy into reciting the Seven Line Prayer and the Vajra Guru mantra. At the end, recite:
né sum dru sum özer gyi
Rays of light stream from the three syllables at the guru’s three centres,
jinlab wang dang ngödrub tob
And I receive his blessings, empowerments and siddhis.
lama ö shyu rang la tim
The guru melts into light and dissolves into me.
yermé machö lhukpar shyak
Inseparable from him, I rest in a natural state of ease.
Dedicate the merit.

This was written by Khyentse Wangpo.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2004.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "sngon 'gro mdor bsdus byang chub lam bzang/" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen
brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. gangtok: gonpo tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 15:
447