The Concise Mahāmudrā Preliminaries Arranged for Recitation
by Karma Chakmé

First, meditate on the difficulty of obtaining the freedoms and advantages. From the Bodhisattva
Piṭaka:
mir gyurpa ni kawa té
Rare it is to become a human being,
mi sok tobpa kawa yin
Rare to obtain a human life.
dampé chö tob kawa té
Rare to encounter the sacred Dharma.
sangye jungwa ang kawa yin
Rare for a Buddha to appear.
Second, meditate on impermanence. The Bodhicaryāvatāra says:1
sang dang jikten chima nyi
There’s no telling which will come first:
ngöndu gang ong tolmepé
Tomorrow or the next life.
sang gi chi la mi bepar
So instead of striving for tomorrow’s sake,
chimé dön la bepar rik
It would be better to work for the next life.
Third, meditate on cause and effect. The shorter Sūtra on the Application of Mindfulness says:
gewa yi ni dewa tob
It is through virtue that one gains happiness;
migewa lé dukngal jung
It is through nonvirtue that suffering arises.
detar gé dang migewé
Thus, the fruits of virtuous and nonvirtuous
lé kyi drebu salwar ten
May be clearly demonstrated.
Fourth, meditate on the trials of saṃsāra. The Sūtra of the Meeting of Father and Son says:
khorwé nyemik tongwa na
Seeing the tribulations of saṃsāra
kyowé sem ni rabtu kyé
Engenders a mind of disenchantment.
kham sum tsönrar jikpé na
In terror of the prison of the three realms,
tsönpé sem kyi pangwar ja
Strive with diligence to leave it behind.
Taking Refuge & Generating Bodhicitta
Then visualize the objects of refuge:
dündu tso ü paksam jönshing gi
In the centre of a lake in front of me
dongpo tsawa chik la yalga ngar
Is a wish-fulfilling tree with a trunk and five main branches.
gyepé ü mar sengtri pema dang
On the central branch, upon a lion throne, lotus,
nyidé tengdu tsawé lama ni
And sun and moon disc seats, is my own root guru,
dorjé chang la kagyü lamé kor
Vajradhara, surrounded by the other Kagyü masters.
dündu yidam yé su sangye dang
To the front are the yidam deities, to the right the Buddhas,
gyabtu damchö yön du gendün dang
Behind is the sacred Dharma, and to the left the Saṅgha.
den tri oktu chökyong sungma nam
Below the throne are dharma protectors and guardians.
sosö rik tün khor tsok gyatsö kor
Each is surrounded by a vast, oceanic retinue of the same type.
tso ta né'u seng tengdu khakhyab kyi
On the meadows that surround the lake all my past mothers,
magen tamché khöpar gyurpa la
Who are as innumerable as space is vast, are gathered
tsechik sem kyi kyamdro semkyé gyur
To take refuge and generate bodhicitta single-pointedly.
Having visualized this, take refuge and generate bodhicitta by reciting:
di né changchub nyingpor chi kyi bar
From now until I reach the essence of enlightenment,
lama sangye chö dang gendün la
With a mind of inspiration, I take refuge
dangwé sem kyi kyab su solwar gyi
In the Guru, Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha.
jitar ngön gyir gyalwé changchub tu
Just as the victorious buddhas of the past
tukkyé chöpa chepar dzepa tar
Set their minds upon awakening, then carried out activity,
dak kyang dro la pen chir semkyé ching
I too generate such an intention so as to benefit beings,
changchub chöpa gyachen chepar gyi
And shall carry out bodhisattva activity on a vast scale.
Repeat these seven lines three times.
dak tsé dré yö dengdir gyalsé gyur
Now my life is fruitful;2 I am the buddhas’ heir.
lhami lasok drowa khyön kün yang
I invite devas, humans and all other beings
dé la drön du bö zin gawar gyi
To the state of bliss—may you all rejoice!
tamar kyabyul ö shyu dak la dré
Finally, the objects of refuge melt into light and dissolve into me.
Vajrasattva Purification
Then, to purify misdeeds and obscurations, there is the visualization and recitation of Vajrasattva.
rang gi chiwor pé dé den gyi teng
At the crown of my head, upon a lotus and moon disc,
lama dorjé sempa gyenden kar
Is the guru Vajrasattva, with adornments and white,
shyal chik chak nyi yepé dorjé dang
With one face and two hands—the right hand holding a vajra
yönpé drilbu dzin ching kyiltrung shyuk
And the left a bell—and seated in cross-legged posture.
tukkar da teng hung tar ngak kyi kor
At his heart, upon a moon, is Hūṃ, surrounded by the mantra.
solwa tabpé ku lé dütsi bab
Through my prayers, a stream of nectar flows from his body,
dak gi tsang buk né shyuk lü gangwé
Enters my brahma-aperture, and fills my entire body,
dikdrib nyetung tamché dakpar gyur
So that all misdeeds, obscurations, faults and downfalls are purified.
Recite the hundred-syllable mantra “Oṃ vajra sattva samaya…etc.” And its quintessence:
om benza sato hung
Oṃ vajra sattva hūṃ
Recite this as many times as possible.
dorjé sempé dak la ukyung shying
Vajrasattva confirms the effectiveness of the practice.
ö shyu dak la timpé nyimé gyur
He melts into light and dissolves into me, indivisibly.
Maṇḍala Offering
Then there is the maṇḍala offering to gather the accumulations:
dün gyi namkhé ü su lama dang
The guru appears in the centre of the space before me.
dün yé gyab dang yön du rimpa shyin
Then, in front, to the right, behind, and to the left,
yidam sangye chö dang gendün dang
Appear the yidam deities, Buddhas, Dharma and Saṅgha,
rik tün khor ché shyenyang den tsam su
Together with their retinues of similar type, while in between
chökyong gyatso lasok könchok nam
There is an ocean of dharma protectors.
tsok kyi shying chok dampa shyukpé drung
Before this sublime field of merit featuring the Three Jewels and the rest,
lak nyi mandal gyi chakgyé jé la
I form the mudrā of the maṇḍala with both my hands,
nyé jé mandal zangpo di pulwé
And offer this fine maṇḍala that is a source of delight.
changchub lam la barché minjung shying
May this prevent obstacles on the path to awakening,
dü sum deshek gongpa tokpa dang
Cause me to realize the wisdom mind of the sugatas of the three times,
sishyir mi né dro nam drolwar shok
And liberate beings beyond the extremes of existence and quiescence.
dakshyen khakhyab dokpa kün pulwé
Through the offering of all that I and others possess,
dro kün tsok nyi rabtu dzok gyur té
May all beings fully perfect the two accumulations.
tsok shying ö shyu dak dang ronyam gyur
The field of merit melts into light and becomes one with me.
Guru Yoga
Then there is the practice of guru yoga for the infusion of blessings.
rang gi chiwor pé dé den tengdu
At the crown of my head, upon a lotus and moon-disc seat,
tsawé lama dorjé chang chenpo
My root guru appears as the great Vajradhara,
gyenden dordril dzinpé chakgya nol
With ornaments and the mudrā of crossed vajra and bell.
dorjé den shyuk gyüpé lama dang
All the gurus of the lineage, presiding on vajra seats,
könchok gyatso to tsek trom du tsok
And an ocean of the Three Jewels gather in tiers like a crowd.
At this point, if you are practising elaborately you might recite the Ngökün Khyabdakma; if
you are doing a medium-length practice, you might recite the Dorje Chang Chenma; if you are
doing the brief form, you might recite the Four Manam Verses,3 and when practising the shortest
form this text alone will suffice.
lama rinpoche la solwa deb
To the precious guru, I pray:
dakdzin lo yi tongwar jingyi lob
Inspire me to abandon this attitude of self-clinging.
gömé gyü la kyewar jingyi lob
Inspire me to develop renunciation in my being.
chö min namtok gakpar jingyi lob
Inspire me to put an end to non-dharmic thoughts.
rangsem kyemé tokpar jingyi lob
Inspire me to realize how my own mind is unborn.
trulpa rang sar shyiwar jingyi lob
Inspire me to pacify delusion in its own place.
nangsi chökur charwar jingyi lob
Inspire me so that appearance and existence dawn as dharmakāya.
Recite this in the manner of calling the guru from afar.
Then receive the four empowerments:
tsechik güpé depa pulwa yi
As a result of my offering of single-pointed devotion,
khor nam ö du shyu né tsowor tim
The retinues melt into light and dissolve into the central figure,
deyang ö shyu dak la timpé
Who also then melts into light and dissolves into me.
ku dang dak lü drepé bum wang tob
Through the merging of enlightened form with my own body, I receive the vase empowerment.
dené sung dang tuk dang yeshe ni
Then, as enlightened speech, mind and wisdom
dak gi ngak yi yeshe dang drepé
Merge with my own speech, mind and wisdom,
sangwa sherab yeshe shyipé wang
I receive the secret, knowledge-wisdom and fourth empowerments,
tob ching go sum drima dakpar gyur
Through which any stains of my three doors are purified
ku shyi sabön gyü la shyakpar dzé
And the seeds of the four kāyas are implanted within my mindstream.
Then adopt the seven-point posture of Vairocana.
Pointing Out Instruction
The Saṃpuṭi says:
jikten kham ni gangdu yang
Not in any realm of this world,
sangye shyen né nyé mingyur
Nowhere else will Buddha be found.
sem di dzokpé sangye yin
This mind is the perfect Buddha.
Lord Götsangpa said:
rang gi sem la cher gyi tö
Look directly into your own mind,
tepé mi tong ngöpo mé
And by looking you will not see, for it has no reality.
And the great adept Saraha said:
khordé kün gyi tsawar gyurpé sem
Mind is the root of all saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.
tok né gom du mé pé lhukpar shyok
Once it is realized, there is nothing to cultivate, so rest at ease.
rang la shyak né shyendu tsolwa a ré trul
How deluded to search outside for what is to be found within!
di yin di minmé dé tamché nyukmé ngang
Without concern as to what is or is not, all is the genuine state.
Dedication of Merit
gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
chakgya chenpo drub gyur né
Attain the realization of Mahāmudrā, and thereby
drowa chik kyang malüpa
Every single sentient being
dé yi sa la göpar shok
Reach this state of perfection too.
If you practice this by combining recitation and visualization in four sessions every day experience
and realization will arise and the resulting benefits will be beyond measure.

Arāga wrote this spontaneously to adorn the composition of the sixth all-knowing one (Shamarpa),
Chökyi Wangchuk, with the relevant practices. May it be of benefit to all students!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2021.

Source: Karma chags med. "phyag chen sngon 'gro bsdus pa'i 'don 'grigs/" in gsung 'bum/_karma
chags med/ (gnas mdo dpe rnying nyams gso khang /). TBRC W1KG8321. 60 vols. [nang chen rdzong]:
gnas mdo gsang sngags chos 'phel gling gi dpe rnying nyams gso khang /, [2010]. http://tbrc.org/link?RID=W1KG8321
Vol 4: 495–502
↑ This does not appear in the Bodhicaryāvatāra. It has also been attributed to the Udānavarga.↑
Reading ‘brel as ‘bras↑ See https://www.lotsawahouse.org/tibetan-masters/gotsangpa-gonpo-dorje/four-manam-refuge