The Recitation for the Gradual Path of the Preliminaries
from The Exceedingly Secret, Enlightened Heart-Essence of the Ḍākinī
revealed by Do Khyentse Yeshe Dorje

I bow to spatial awareness, Samantabhadrā and Samantabhadra!

In this, the gradual practice of the preliminaries For The Exceedingly Secret, Enlightened Heart-Essence
of the Ḍākinī, Begin by adopting the seven-point posture of VairocanaAnd bringing
forth the power of the three types of faith.

emaho
Emaho!
dün khar ja ögur khyim ü
In the space before me, in the center of a tent of rainbow light,
sengtri pema nyidé teng
On top of a lion throne, a lotus, sun, and moon,
guru tsokyé dorjé ting
Is the dark blue Lake-Born Guru in union with the consort.
yabyum ö kyi ku ru sal
They manifest clearly in bodies of light.

namo
Namo!
chok sum tsa sum ku sum kündü pal
The glorious embodiment of the Three Jewels, Three Roots, and Three Kāyas,
dorjé chang wang tönpa drima mé
Is Vajradhara, the Stainless Teacher,
yermé lama tsokyé trulpé ku
Inseparable from the nirmāṇakāya Lake-Born Guru.
khyen no dak gyü jingyi lab tu sol
Please care for me and bless my mind-stream!

dak gi daljor ten zang rinchen lü
Now I have obtained this precious and excellent human body with freedoms and favorable conditions,
pé drang tak kyi goné nyé kawa
Which is just like a wish-fulfilling jewel and rarely found,
yishyin nor dra tobpé dü diru
As demonstrated through examples, numerical statistics, and signs.
lokpé lam duma tong lama khyen
Guru, help me not to drift onto mistaken paths!

kyema kyi hü düjé mi tak té
Alas! Compounded phenomena are impermanent:
chinö dü kyi gyur dok mé chü jik
Over time fire and water destroy the environment,
nangchü kyé ga na chi nyurdu leb
And for sentient beings, birth, old age, sickness, and death arrive swiftly.
kyoshé tingné kyewar lama khyen
Guru, help me to generate disenchantment from deep within!

dak gi sokchö ku trok lokpar yem
Help me to abandon the negativities of killing, stealing or robbing, sexual misconduct,
dzün tra tsiktsub ngakkhyal nab nö nak
Lying, divisive speech, harsh words, senseless chatter, covetousness, ill will, and wrong views
lokta gyü ngen pang shying gé chu drub
And accomplish the ten virtues!
gyundré go lok ma tong lama khyen
Guru, help me not to misunderstand causes and their results!

nyalwa yidak düdro lha mayin
Hell-beings, hungry ghosts, animals, demi-gods,
lhami nyi té rik druk khorwé né
Gods, and humans—those are the six classes of beings.
gangdu kyé kyang dukngal zö lakmé
Regardless of the cyclic abode in which they are born, their suffering is unbearable.
khorwa dong né trukpar lama khyen
Guru, help me to empty the depths of cyclic existence!

milü len chik tobpa kalwa zang
Obtaining this human body just once is tremendously fortunate.
ati lamé zabsang nyingpö lam
Encountering the practices of The Enlightened Heart-Essence,
tuk kyi tikler trepa ngotsar ché
The essential path of the profoundly secret, unsurpassable Ati, is astonishing!
salam nyurdu dröpar lama khyen
Guru, help me to traverse the paths and stages swiftly!

kal mang gong né tukjé jezung bé
Supreme vajra master endowed with threefold kindness,1
kadrin sumden dorjé lobpön chok
You have cared for me over many eons.
nyepa sum gyi shyabtok tarchin né
Having perfected the three services that are pleasing to you,2
tukgyü gongpa tokpar lama khyen
Guru, help me to realize the nature of your Wisdom Mind!

di dang chima bardö né küntu
Be in it this life, the next, or in the intermediate state,
khyé dang mindral nam shyi trinlé kyi
May I never be separate from you but become an emissary of your four enlightened activities.
ponyar gyur né khorwa matongpar
Until cyclic existence has been emptied,
jang chub semkyé dro dön tarchin shok
May I generate bodhicitta and fully accomplish beings’ aims!
This was the stage of the common practices.
Main Practice
The crucial point of the main practice is as follows:
rangnyi daki karmo dri tö dzin
I am the White Ḍākinī holding a curved knife and a skull-cup.
lü ü u kyang ro sum kar mar ting
In the center of my body are the central, left, and right channels—dark blue, red, and white.
nyön shé ledrib nedön bakchak lung
The winds of cognitive and emotional afflictions, karma, obscurations, sicknesses, provocations,
and subtle mental impressions
duk lang nampa wangchen sa shyir tim
Take the form of poisonous vapors which dissolve into the powerful foundation of the earth.
nyinggar kunzang tuk ü sok yik a
In my heart is Samantabhadra, and in the center of his heart is the life-force syllable ā.
jinlab ö ting rokyang lam né gyü
Blessings in the form of dark blue light travel the pathways of the left and right channels,
a kar la tim lü nang ö kyi gang
And dissolve into the white a, filling my body with light.
In conjunction with [retaining] the soft breath, investigate the mind in detail.
The practice of the uncommon recitations:
Taking Refuge
First, taking refuge:
dün khar ja ö trikpé long
In the space before me, in an expanse of densely arrayed rainbow light,
kyabné kündü dorjé chang
Is the embodiment of all sources of refuge—Vajradhara in union with the consort.
yabyum ziji ö du bar
Their brilliant bodies blaze with light,
rang lé trulpé tsok ché sal
And they clearly appear along with their emanated retinues.

buddha dharma samghaya
Buddha, Dharma, Saṃgha
guru dewa daki ni
Guru, Deva, Ḍākinī,
dharma sambho nirmaka
Dharmakāya, saṃbhogakāya, nirmāṇakāya
kündü drinchen lama la
The embodiment of them all—the gracious guru,
kyab su chi o tukjé zung
I take refuge in you; hold me with your compassion!
Generation of the Mind Intent upon Supreme Enlightenment
marik lé nyön dukngal gyi
Non-recognition, karma, afflictions, and suffering
zirwé pama khanyam dro
Torment my parents, the beings who are as infinite as space in number.
lamé gopang nyur tob chir
So that they might swiftly attain the status of the guru,
mönjuk döndam sem chok kyé
I generate supreme aspirational, active, and absolute bodhicitta.
Persist in this until it is actualized. The five main factors are devotion, pure vision,Loving
affection, compassion, and generosity. Always exert yourself in these, as they are the
basis of training.
Maṇḍala Offering
For accumulating the conditions of the path, The stage of offering one hundred thousand maṇḍalas:
om ah hung
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ.
mijé tongsum jikten lhami nor
The Enduring three-thousandfold world system,3 the riches of gods and humans,
dak lü kyegü longchö mandal dzé
My body, and the resources of all sentient beings are substances of this maṇḍala.
nangtar pung kham tsa lung tiklér ché
Internally, the aggregates, elements, channels, winds, and essences
ngaden shying kö döyön chöpé trin
Are all arranged as a fivefold pure realm and are offering clouds of sensual delights.

sangwa ngowo rangshyin tukjé tsal
Secretly, the essence, nature, and dynamic expression of compassion,
chöying namdak shyönnu bumkü shying
The pure space of phenomena, the realm of the youthful vase body—
sangye kündü lama kyilkhor la
I offer them all to the maṇḍala of the guru, embodiment of all buddhas.
bul lo dro kün tsok nyi yongdzok shok
May all beings completely perfect the two accumulations!
Gather countless accumulations [through making maṇḍala offerings] in accordance with your means.
Purification of Obscurations
Purification of obscurations and presentation of unrestricted offerings:
chiwor pekar da den dorjé sem
On the crown of my head, upon a white lotus and a moon seat is Vajrasattva.
karsal longkü ché dzok yum dang tril
He is brilliant white, completely adorned with saṃbhogakāya ornaments, and in union with his
consort.
jortsam dütsi gyün bab chiwor shyuk
A stream of nectar descends from the point of their union and enters the crown of my head.
drib nyi nyetung galtrul nyamchak kün
The two obscurations, faults, downfalls, transgressions, delusions, degenerations, and defilements
lhakmé trü shing sa shyi kham khyabpé
Are all completely purified and permeate into the foundation of the earth.
rik druk semchen lenchak gek rik tsim
The classes of obstructors are satisfied and the karmic debts of the six classes are repaid.
Recite the hundred syllables and focus on the key points of the visualization While meditating
on compassion until you are moved to tears. The guru is pleased and lovingly grants his
approval,Your body dissolves into light and fades like a rainbow in the sky.
rangrig machö deshyin nyi
Uncontrived reflexive awareness is thatness.
nyingjé ngang lé rangrig hum
From a state of compassion, reflexive awareness emerges as hūṃ.
khu dul teng bab trodü jang
The male and female essences rise and descend. [Light rays] emanate and are reabsorbed, purifying
everything.
rangnyi dorsem ting sal dok
I am Vajrasattva, brilliant dark blue.
dorjé dril dzin kyiltrung shyuk
I hold a vajra and bell as I sit in a cross-legged posture.
longkü ché dzok özer bar
Replete with saṃbhogakāya adornments, I blaze with light rays.
tukkar da teng hung yik tar
In the center of my heart is the syllable hūṃ,
ngak kyi korwé özer gyi
Around which the mantra spins and projects rays of light,
gyal chö dro drib kün jang shing
Which make offerings to the victorious ones and purify the obscurations of beings.
namdak gyalwé shying du gyur
Everything becomes the pure realm of the victorious ones.
om ah benza sato hung
oṃ āḥ vajrasattva hūṃ
Recite the [mantra] continuously like a flowing river, Without parting from the three transformations,4Then
rest in an unconditioned state. This is the deity yoga of the creation stage.
The completion stage consists of training in the channels, winds, and the constituents
of the essences,Which is the basis for accomplishing the body of light. It is the stage of
the path for endeavoring in the key points Of the profound pith instructions concerning
the four elements.
At the end of the session, the outer environment and all beings dissolve into oneself;The appearance
of the deity dissolves up to and including the nāda5 of the life-force [syllable]
residing in the heart;Rest in a non-referential, inexpressible state, Maintaining the innate,
natural state of reflexive awareness. This gradual path is in no way ordinary,So earnestly
strive upon this profound path! Samaya!
Guru Yoga
The main practice of the uncommon path Is the outer practice and method for realizing the Wisdom
MindCalled the blessings of guru yoga. Bring it into your own experience as it is the
single, all-sufficient approach.
emaho
Emaho!
lamar mögü dro la nyingjé dang
Radiance of devotion for the guru and compassion for beings,
ma dak trulnang milam sepa shyin
As if waking from a dream of impure and deluded appearances,
nangwé gar khyab nö kyi jikten kün
Shines forth and pervades the entire worldly environment,
womin pema ö kyi shyalyé khang
Which is Akaniṣṭha with the immeasurable Palace of Lotus Light.
ö nang gyen kö pünsum tsokpé ü
I am Vajrayoginī of great bliss
rangnyi dechen dorjé naljorma
In the center of the perfectly arranged, ornamented and resplendent palace.
mar sal shyal chik shyi dzum chakpé nyam
I am luminous red with one face, a peaceful smile, and I display a passionate countenance.
chak nyi yepé driguk ku la ten
My right hand holds a curved knife at my hip;
yönpé dütsi töpa ying su tob
My left hand offers a skull-cup of nectar into space.
shyab nyi pamo rolpé dortab chen
My two legs dance in the posture of a playful heroine.
langtsö zibar nu bur bhaga gyé
I blaze with youth and have ample breasts and a full bhaga.
rinchen rüpé gyencha sil sil drok
My precious bone ornaments rattle and jingle.
dé gü chen sum lamé ku la ta
My three eyes gaze with faith and devotion at my guru.
pema nyima tokmé roden gying
I stand poised upon a lotus, sun disc, and a corpse of non-conceptuality.
khaying jinlab ja ö khyilpé long
In a space filled with a swirling expanse of rainbow light imbued with blessings,
pema bum dal nyidé den gyi ü
On a hundred-thousand-petaled lotus, sun, and moon,
ku sum gyalwa malü düpé pal
Is the glorious embodiment of all the three-kāya victors,
kadrin sumden lama dorjé chang
The guru Vajradhara endowed with threefold kindness.
jetsün guru buddha tötreng tsal
He is in the form of the Guru Buddha Tötrengtsal,
kudok kar la marwé dang chakpa
White in color and with a ruddy complexion.
shyal chik shyi dzum chak yé raldri char
His one face smiles serenely as he holds a sword in his right hand
yönpé bhenda dütsi kangwa nam
And a bhāṇḍa filled with nectar in his left.
utra tortsuk taksham rügyen tré
His hair is bound in a topknot, and he wears a tiger-skin skirt and bone ornaments.
shyab nyi sempé kyiltrung özer trö
His two legs are in the cross-legged posture of a bodhisattva as he emits rays of light.
chenkhung yön nakha tamka yi dzé
The crook of his left arm is adorned with a khaṭvāṅga.
chiwor rikdak garab pawo chok
On the crown of his head is the lord of the family, the supreme hero Garab,
dé yi chiwor tönpa dorjé sem
And on his crown is the teacher Vajrasattva.
ta kor kagyü lama yidam lha
In the surrounding area, gurus of the oral teachings, deities,
khandro chökyong tsok ché trin tar tib
Ḍākinīs, and dharma protectors gather like billowing clouds.
Visualization and Invitation
Clear visualization of the field of accumulation, and invitation:
ho, chö kyi ying dang ngaden shying
Ho: From the space of phenomena, the fivefold pure abodes, and
drodul tulkü shyingkham né
The pure realms of emanations who tame beings,
ku sum shyi chak trowö lha
The peaceful, amorous, and wrathful deities of the three enlightened bodies,
tsé chen tukjé né dir shek
Out of your immense love and compassion, come to this place!
kündü tsawé lamar tim
Dissolve into the root guru, the embodiment of all!
dak la wangkur jin gyi lob
Confer blessings and empowerment upon me!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant the supreme and common accomplishments!
Sevenfold Offering
dak dang dro druk semchen gyi
I and all sentient beings of the six types of transmigrations,
dul nyé lü trul gü chaktsal
We emanate as many bodies as there are atoms and offer you prostrations.
kunzang chötrin gyatsö chö
We present offerings as vast as the offering clouds of [bodhisattva] Samantabhadra.
diktung damtsik nyamchak shak
We confess misdeeds, downfalls, impairments, and breakages of our tantric observances.
lamé dzepar jé yirang
We rejoice in the activities of the guru.
ati chökhor korwar kul
We beseech you to turn the wheel of the dharma of Ati.
semchen döndu shyuk soldeb
We pray you remain here for the sake of sentient beings.
gé tsok semchen döndu ngo
We dedicate this virtue for the benefit of sentient beings.
Single-Pointed Supplication
kyé, jetsün guru rinpoche
Alas! Venerable Guru Rinpoché,
dakchak khorwé né su khyam
We have wandered through the abodes of cyclic existence,
lé nyön dukngal drakpö zir
Tormented by the intensity of our karma, afflictions, and suffering—
zungdzin shyakpé dam du ching
Tightly bound in a noose of subject-object fixation;
khyé lé resa shyendu mé
We have no other hope but you!
mögü temkyang mepa yi
With steadfast devotion,
solwa nying gi kyil né deb
We supplicate you from the core of our hearts.
khyé tuk nyingjé chenpo yi
With your wholly altruistic mind,
tsé chen tukjé nyer gong la
Kindly consider us with your great love and compassion.
jinlab nütu shuk drakpö
With your immensely powerful and effective blessings
dak gyü jin gyi lab né kyang
Bless our mind-streams;
tukgyü gongpa tokpar shok
May we realize your Wisdom Mind!
om ah maha guru ratna siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ mahā guru ratna siddhi hūṃ
Supplicate with tears of faith and devotion And strive in this approach recitation.
Whenever the mind has become dull and lethargic, The guru and ḍākinīs fill all apparent existence,
The meditative “ur” experience of suchness [comes forth],6The deities dance about—kyuk
sé kyuk, And the experiential songs of enlightened speech [resound]—u ru ru, Then rest
in a state of joyful delight.
Whenever malicious attacks by demons and provocative forces occur, Initially, in a state of
strong compassion Visualize that from your own heart (as the ḍākinī) Light rays emanate with
sensual delights at their tips. The demons and provocative forces are satisfied by these
gifts, pacifying their maleficence. Light rays radiate from the heart of the guruAnd purify
your subtle mental impressions and obscurations. One and all become gurus and ḍākinīs,And
you are granted the accomplishments.
Whenever you are afflicted and tormented by disease, Joyfully meditate on how this isThe ripening
of residual karma and make supplications. Light rays from the heart of the guru [radiate
out], And they gather the disease of all transient beings into you. Primordial wisdom
fire comes forth from the Lord of the Family, [Garab Dorjé]And incinerates all disease, provocative
forces, and subtle mental impressions within your body. Rest in a non-referential
state of emptiness.
Whenever afflictive mental states and discursive, restless thoughts occur,Focus your mind on
the heart of the guru And look directly into the essence of the five poisons. Completely
relax your body and mind, resting with whatever arises. These are the profound key instructions.
Lineage Supplication
emaho
Emaho!
shyönnu bumkü ngowo tongchen yum
The essence of the youthful vase body is the mother who is great emptiness (Samantabhadrā),
rang dang gakmé kuntuzangpo shar
The unceasing natural radiance arises as Samantabhadra,
tukjé rang tsal tönpa dorjé sem
The natural dynamic expression of compassion is Vajrasattva,
sherab yum chok yeshe daki mar
The supreme mother Prajñāpāramitā is the primordial wisdom ḍākinī,7

solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
I pray to you, bless my mind-stream!
dechen gyurmé benza wa ra hih
Unchanging great bliss, Vajravārāhī,
ka yi duwa sangdak dorjé dzin
The compiler of the teachings, the Lord of Secrets and Holder of the Vajra, [Vajrapāṇi],
kyilkhor tsowo tra tuk heruka
The principal deity of the maṇḍala, the Blood-Drinking Heruka [Guru Rinpoché],

sangwé yum chok lhacham dé ter mar
The supreme and secret consort, the bliss-bestowing princess [Mandāravā],
solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
I pray to you, bless my mind-stream!
shyingkham wanggyur dewa ying drönma
The ruler of the pure realms, the Feminine Lamp of Blissful Space,
ka yi duwa rigdzin dorjé jak
The compilers of the teachings, the vajra tongues of the knowledge-holders,

chok gi kabab rigpa dzin nam dang
Knowledge-holders of the supreme transmissions,
bumtrak yangpé yeshe khandrö tsok
Assemblies of hundreds of thousands of primordial wisdom ḍākinīs,
solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
I pray to you, bless my mind-stream!
takhob dong mar böyul sinpö ling
In the borderlands of the red-faced people in the country of Tibet, the land of the sinpo,8

yangsang lümé khandrö tuk tik chö
There is the cycle of The Exceedingly Secret, Enlightened Heart-Essence of the Formless Ḍākinīs,
da gyur rigdzin traktung heruka
The decoder of their symbols, the knowledge-holder, Traktung Heruka [Do Khyentsé Yeshé Dorjé],
chödak drok dzé döden kün kyong ma
The custodian of the teachings, the companion, Passionate Protectress of All, [Losal Drölma],9
solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
I pray to you, bless my mind-stream!

yingrik trul gyur daki ché nyi dang
Emanations of space and awareness, the two ḍākinī relations,10
kalden lechen kabab dorjé drok
Fortunate vajra companions of the transmitted teachings who possess the karma,
ka yi lé dzé tensung damchen dé
Classes of oath-bound protectors of the teachings who carry out the commands,
nyer dzin drekpé depön tsok ché la
Those who care for the teachings, the chief of the haughty ones along with your hosts,

solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
I pray to you, bless my mind-stream!
tsechik solwa tabpé jinlab kyi
Through the blessings of this single-pointed supplication
dakchak damden dorjé mingsing tsok
We, vajra brothers and sisters, who maintain our commitments
lamar tsechik mögü dung tsuk shing
Have firmly established one-pointed fervent devotion to the guru and

mi tak khorwa shyenpa rang lok né
Have naturally become disgusted with impermanent cyclic existence.
chakdang drok lé drolwar jingyi lob
Inspire us to escape from the fetters of attachment and aversion!
drong dang drongkhyer durtrö shing chik drung
In villages, cities, cremation grounds, at the foot of trees,
naktrö bé ta tso ling drakkyib sok
In forests and secluded areas, on islands, and under overhanging rocks,

ngemé né su chikpur drub la tsön
Endeavor in practicing alone in undetermined places.
temé nyönpa tabü tulshyuk kyi
Through tantric observances, acting unpredictably as if mad,
tsa lung tiklé lé su rungwar shok
May the channels, winds, and essences become pliable!
nyin nang ku dang yeshe rang ngoshé
During the day, may I recognize appearances as enlightened bodies and primordial wisdom!

tsen nang milam ösal bub su jak
During the night, may I settle into the inner space of the brilliance of dream!
bardor lamé damngak zer gyi teb
In the intermediate state, may the nail of the guru’s pith instructions hit home!
trekchö tögal drebü tsal dzok né
Having perfected the dynamic energy that results from Cutting Through and Leaping Over,
bub juk dömé ying su drolpar shok
May I enter the womb, liberated into primordial space!

dakchak drelwé düpé gangzak kün
May all of us who have come together through our connections,
ma tok trulpé dzin shyen rang sar drol
Liberate our unrealized, deluded clinging-fixation into its natural place,
zang ngen ga duk redok langdor shyik
Destroy acceptance and rejection of good and bad, joy and sorrow, and hope and fear,
nyönmong bakchak drima rang dak né
Purify the stains of mental afflictions and subtle mental impressions,

yangsang tuk tik duljar gyurwar shok
And become disciples of The Exceedingly Secret, Enlightened Heart-Essence!
shyenyang tong tö dren rik lé kyi drel
By being connected to the teaching through the karma of seeing, hearing, or recollecting it,
khakhyab pama semchen malü kün
May all sentient beings, my very own parents, who pervade the whole of space,
tongnyi changchub sem chok gyü la kyé
Generate supreme emptiness-bodhicitta in their mind-streams!

deden shying dang womin pal gyi rir
In blissful realms or on the glorious mountain in Akaniṣṭha,
ngön sangye né khorwa yong tong shok
May we all actualize buddhahood and empty cyclic existence!
Receiving the Four Empowerments
At the end of the session, receive the four empowerments:
mögü tsechik solwa tabpa yi
As a result of single-pointedly supplicating with devotion
lamé tralwé ökar chiwor shyuk
White light emanates from the guru’s forehead and enters my crown;
lü tsé drib dak bumpé wang chok tob
Obscurations of the body and channels are purified, and the supreme vase empowerment is obtained.

shyal né ö mar dak gi drinpar tim
Red light emanates from the guru’s mouth and dissolves into my throat,
ngak lung drib dak sangwé wang chok tob
Obscurations of speech and winds are purified, and the supreme secret empowerment is obtained.

tukké ö ting rang gi nyinggar tim
Dark blue light emanates from the guru’s heart and dissolves into my heart,
yi tik drib dak yeshe wang chok tob
Obscurations of the mind and essences are purified, and the supreme empowerment of primordial
wisdom is obtained.

tuk lé a kar nying gi kyil du bab
The white a-syllable emanates from the guru’s heart and descends into the center of my heart,
kün shedrib dak rigpé tsal wang tob
Obscurations of the all-base consciousness are purified, and the empowerment of the dynamic
expression of awareness is obtained.

dorjé shyir dzok rigdzin nam shyir min
The four vajras are perfected, the four stages of knowledge-holders are attained,
drebu ku shyi yeshe ngön du gyur
And the resultant primordial wisdom of the four enlightened bodies is actualized.
lamé tuk dang rangsem yermé du
With my own mind inseparable from the guru’s,
nyukma machö ngang du jenpar shyak
I rest nakedly in the innate and uncontrived state.
Bring this profound practice of guru yogaSingle-pointedly into your own experience!There is
no doubt that those endowed with fortune will directly manifest the results of accomplishment!
These are the pith instructions for realizing the Wisdom Mind.
The night-time internal practice of the guru:In a state that is not separated from the clear
appearance of the yoginī:
emaho
Emaho!
rang lü jatsön tar sal lü ü su
My body clearly appears like a body of rainbow light.
tsitta rinchen ö kyi gurkhang nang
In its center, within my precious citta is a tent of light,
pema nyida tsekpé den tengdu
Where, upon a lotus, sun, and moon seat, is
buddha tötreng longkü chaluk dzok
Buddha Tötrengtsal complete with saṃbhogakāya attire.

ting sal kyiltrung nyamshyak ser dor tsen
Dark blue, he sits in equipoise in a cross-legged posture; he is marked by a golden vajra.
tukkar a kar drimé dawé dok
At his heart is a stainless white a-syllable, the color of the moon.
sum dor ö mar tiklé a tung zuk
At the juncture of the three channels is the form of the short a in a sphere of red light.
ö kyi lü nang drönmé jishyin sal
The inside of the body of light is illuminated like a lamp.

rigpa machö jenmé ngang du shyak | ah
Rest in a state of uncontrived, naked awareness. A.
Recite the essential unborn [sound] one hundred and eight timesAnd focus your awareness on the
a-syllable. Within a state devoid of elaborations, enter the state of the luminosity of
dream.
These profound pith instructions Are the key to realizing that your mind is the dharmakāya.
The clouds of blessings from the internal practiceAre the special qualities for accomplishing
buddhahood in a single life.
Ema! More secret than even the extremely secret Is the method of practicing the gradual path
of the preliminaries of The unsurpassably profound Exceedingly Secret, Enlightened Heart-EssenceCalled
the “Garland of Wish-fulfilling Jewels.”  It is the unmistaken teaching of the
heroic Teacher Garab.
I, Traktung Dewé Dorjé (Blissful Blood-Drinking Vajra), Through the coming together of profound
interdependent connections, Deciphered this [treasure] as dictated by the indications
of Ḍākki, the custodian of the teachings. Let the guardians of the oral and treasure teachings
successfully protect this [treasure]! Samaya! Seal—Seal—Seal! Seal of the enlightened
body, speech, and mind!

This practice is like a precious supplication for blessings and accomplishments. It was written
down by Rigpé Yeshé. May it liberate as many sentient beings as there are grains of sand!Śubham—Virtue!

| Translated by Ryan Jacobson, Tom Greensmith and Tenzin Choephel, 2021.

Sources
Ye shes rdo rje. 2009. “sngon 'gro'i lam rim ngag 'don.” In gter chos, mdo mkhyen brtse ye shes
rdo rje, vol. 2, pp. 7–24. khreng tu'u: rdzogs chen dpon slob rin po che. BDRC W1PD89990.
Mkhyen brtse ye shes rdo rje. 1978. “sngon 'gro'i lam rim ngag 'don”. In gcod 'dzin pa rang
grol gyi 'don cha'i skor, pp. 5–25. Paro: Ngodrub and Sherab Demy. Ed. rgyal dbang nyi ma.
BDRC W26033

Version: 1.1-20211020
↑ The threefold kindness of bestowing empowerments (wang; dbang), granting oral transmissions
(lung; lung), and imparting instructions (tri; khrid).↑ The three pleasing services are
1) presenting material offerings, 2) providing assistance, and 3) practicing the instructions.↑
This is a world system in which beings are able to endure their suffering and travel
the path to enlightenment.↑ This refers to all appearances being the deity, all sounds being
mantra, and all thoughts being the dharmakāya.↑ The nāda is the uppermost wisp of the
essential drop at the top of the syllable above the crescent moon.↑ The meditative experience
of the realization of suchness, or dharmatā, is expressed in the onomatopoeic and imitative
sound of ur.↑ Although Vajrāṭopā is sometimes given as the Sanskrit name of Vajrasattva's
consort, whose Tibetan name is Dorje Nyemma (rdo rje snyems ma), it seems that the correct
Sanskrit name, which is attested in extant sources, is Vajragarvā.↑ Nebesky-Wojkowitz’s
Oracles and Demons of Tibet: The Cult and Iconography of the Tibetan Protective Deities
1956, 280: the srin po were autochthonous deities of a pre-Buddhist hierarchical pantheon.
They later became synonymous with the Indian rākṣasa, being subsumed under a Buddhist
view of the world.↑ Losal Drölma (1802–1861) was the spiritual consort of Do Khyentsé Yeshé
Dorjé and became the doctrine holder (chos bdag) of his treasure teachings.↑ These two ḍākinīs
are Do Khyentse’s daughter Khaying Drölma (mkha' dbyings sgrol ma, 1823–1854) and granddaughter
Tsedzin Wangmo (tshe 'dzin dbang mo, 1894–1953).